---
title: Artificial Influence: Navigating the Ethical Terrain of AI-Enhanced Political Campaigns
tags: Blog AI
---

In today’s fast-paced digital age, the merging of artificial intelligence (AI) and political campaigning has brought about both exciting possibilities and significant ethical concerns. The use of AI to create presidential campaign media, such as posters, illustrations, and cartoonized candidates, offers innovative ways to connect with audiences. However, these advancements come with serious ethical baggage that we can’t afford to ignore. Integrating AI into political campaigns is like a double-edged sword: it can both boost engagement potential while risking to plunge us into murky waters of manipulation. With technology reshaping the political landscape, it’s crucial to dive deeper into the ethical questions surrounding this issue.

<!--more-->

<h2>The Ethical Dilemma of the 2024 Presidential Election in Indonesia</h2>


The 2024 Indonesian presidential campaign presents a complex case in the ethical discourse on AI usage in a political context. One candidate’s campaign team has fully embraced AI to generate media, which raises serious questions about ethics and intent. A clear example, reimagining **a controversial figure** in an overly positive light isn’t just creative -- it’s manipulative. This is not just about clever marketing; it's about the integrity of democracy.

Yes, AI’s ability to produce customized and visually captivating content has undeniably revolutionized how campaigns communicate. With tools that can generate bespoke images, illustrations, and even cartoons, campaigns now have the power to mass-produce striking materials tailored to different demographics and platforms in no time. It’s efficient, it’s cutting-edge, and it works.

But, is it fair?

While the efficiency of AI is impressive, the ethical challenges it introduces are just as significant. Some of the key issues include:

<h3>Authenticity and Misrepresentation</h3>
Beyond the potential for misleading imagery, using AI to soften the public personas of contentious figures into ‘cute’ and ‘cuddly’ versions raises profound ethical questions. It suggests that such practices go beyond mere aesthetic considerations and touch on deeper ethical concerns about honesty, transparency, and the integrity of the democratic process. This manipulation can distort public perception, masking serious allegations and diverting attention from substantive policy discussions. It underscores the need for ethical guidelines that prevent the whitewashing of candidates’ histories and ensure that AI-generated media serves to inform rather than deceive voters.

<h3>Transparency and Accountability</h3>
The case of AI-generated images in Indonesian politics highlights the need for transparency regarding the origins of campaign materials. Voters must be informed when content is AI-generated to make educated judgments about the information presented. By knowing that certain images are generated by AI, voters can take into account factors such as potential biases in the algorithms used or the lack of human creativity and intentionality in the design process when evaluating political messages. Additionally, accountability mechanisms must be in place to address any misuse of AI in campaign media, ensuring ethical standards are upheld.

<h3>Impact on Creative Workers</h3>
The concerns raised by illustrators and creative professionals about the use of AI in generating campaign media touch on broader ethical considerations regarding labour rights and the valuation of human creativity. It raises discourses about the intrinsic value of human creativity and the potential consequences of its devaluation. AI-generated content, while innovative and may offer efficiency and cost-saving benefits, should not undermine the economic and professional interests of artists and illustrators. It should not erode the livelihoods or job opportunities of artists and illustrators who rely on their creative skills for income. Engaging with creative communities and developing fair compensation and attribution models for AI-generated content is essential to respect and integrate human creativity with technological advancement. Rather than seeing AI as a replacement for human creativity, there is an opportunity to use it as a tool to enhance and complement the creative process while still honoring the contributions of human artists and illustrators.

<h2>The Problematic Usage of AI for Political Campaign</h2>
The 2024 Indonesian presidential campaign provides a stark illustration of these ethical challenges. The transformation of one of the candidates, a figure associated with human rights abuse allegations, into a benign character through AI-generated media exemplifies the risks of misrepresentation and manipulation inherent in these technologies. This strategy not only potentially distorts the electorate’s perception but also raises broader concerns about the erasure of serious ethical and legal concerns associated with a candidate’s past.

Furthermore, the backlash from the illustrator community in Indonesia underscores the tension between technological innovation and the rights of creative workers. The use of AI in this manner reflects a lack of consideration for the artistic process and the economic implications for professionals in the field. Addressing these concerns requires a collaborative approach involving dialogue with creative communities to develop ethical guidelines that respect both the potential of AI and the value of human creativity.

<h2>Legal and Regulatory Framework in Indonesia</h2>
Recognizing the ethical and social implications of AI, Indonesia has taken steps to establish a foundational ethical framework for AI use. Notably, the Ministry of Communication and Informatics (MOCI) issued Circular Letter №9 of 2023 on AI Ethical Guidelines ([Surat Edaran Menteri Komunikasi dan Informatika Nomor 9 Tahun 2023 tentang Etika Kecerdasan Artifisial](https://jdih.kominfo.go.id/produk_hukum/view/id/883/t/surat+edaran+menteri+komunikasi+dan+informatika+nomor+9+tahun+2023)) , alongside the Financial Services Authority (OJK) Ethical Guidelines on Responsible and Trustworthy AI ([Panduan Kode Etik Kecerdasan Buatan yang Bertanggung Jawab dan Terpercaya](https://www.ojk.go.id/id/berita-dan-kegiatan/publikasi/Documents/Pages/Panduan-Kode-Etik-Kecerdasan-Buatan-AI-yang-Bertanggung-Jawab-dan-Terpercaya-di-Industri-Teknologi-Finansial/OJK_Panduan%20Kode%20Etik%20Kecerdasan%20Buatan%20AI%20Yang%20Bertanggungjawab%20dan%20Terpercaya%20di%20Industri%20Teknologi%20Finansial.pdf)). These guidelines represent initial efforts to guide AI development and use within ethical boundaries, emphasizing principles such as fairness, accountability, and transparency.

While these guidelines are a significant start, ongoing dialogue and development are essential to ensure they remain relevant and effective in addressing the complexities of AI applications in political campaigning and beyond. Engaging with all stakeholders, including AI professionals, computer ethicists, political actors, and creative professionals, will be crucial in refining and expanding these guidelines to cover the nuanced ethical landscapes AI continues to create.

<h2>Conclusion</h2>
The ethical landscape of using AI in presidential campaign media is complex and multifaceted. As illustrated by Indonesia’s presidential election case, it necessitates a careful balance between leveraging technological advancements for political engagement and safeguarding ethical principles such as authenticity, fairness, transparency, respect for labour, and privacy. Establishing robust ethical frameworks and working together with all stakeholders is essential to navigate these challenges effectively. Only through such collaborative efforts can the benefits of AI be harnessed in a manner that upholds the integrity of the democratic process and respects the contributions of creative communities.
